# GitHub Pandoc HTML5 Template Source Files

    pandoc v2.1.1 | PP v2.1.5

Here are the source files to build the GitHub template and the template preview example, plus some watch and build scripts to facilitate working with the sources.


-----

**Table of Contents**


<!-- MarkdownTOC autolink="true" bracket="round" autoanchor="false" lowercase="only_ascii" uri_encoding="true" levels="1,2,3,4" -->

- [Files List](#files-list)
- [Build Instructions](#build-instructions)
    - [Requirements](#requirements)
    - [Building The Template](#building-the-template)
    - [Building The Template Preview](#building-the-template-preview)
- [Editing Instructions](#editing-instructions)
    - [Editing The Template](#editing-the-template)
    - [Editing The Template Preview](#editing-the-template-preview)

<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->

-----


# Files List

- [`_alerts.scss`](./_alerts.scss) — Sass module
- [`_github-markdown.scss`](./_github-markdown.scss) — Sass module
- [`_pandoc.scss`](./_pandoc.scss) — Sass module
- [`BUILD-ALL.bat`](./BUILD-ALL.bat) — launches `TEMPLATE-BUILD.bat` and `PREVIEW-BUILD.bat`
- [`css-injector.js`](./css-injector.js) — injects CSS in template (used by `TEMPLATE-BUILD.bat`)
- [`GitHub.css.map`](./GitHub.css.map) — CSS source map file (*autogenerated*)
- [`GitHub.css`](./GitHub.css) — template stylesheet (*autogenerated*)
- [`GitHub.min.css`](./GitHub.min.css) — template stylesheet minified (*autogenerated*)
- [`GitHub.scss`](./GitHub.scss) — template's main Sass file that load all other SCSS modules.
- [`GitHub_source.html5`](./GitHub_source.html5) — template source with placeholder string for CSS injection.
- [`LICENSE`](./LICENSE) — MIT License text.
- [`PREVIEW-BUILD.bat`](./PREVIEW-BUILD.bat) — builds `../GitHub-Template-Preview.html`
- [`PREVIEW.md`](./PREVIEW.md) — source contents of `../GitHub-Template-Preview.html`
- [`SASS-BUILD.bat`](./SASS-WATCH.bat) — force builds `GitHub.css` from `*.scss` source files.
- [`SASS-WATCH.bat`](./SASS-WATCH.bat) — force builds `GitHub.css` and then watches `*.scss` files.
- [`TEMPLATE-BUILD.bat`](./TEMPLATE-BUILD.bat) — builds `../GitHub.html5`
- [`WATCH-ALL.bat`](./WATCH-ALL.bat) — rebuilds `../GitHub.html5` and `../GitHub-Template-Preview.html` if any source file changes.

# Build Instructions

The [`BUILD-ALL.bat`](./BUILD-ALL.bat) script will build/update both the template and the template preview example (in parent folder):

- `../GitHub.html5`
- `../GitHub-Template-Preview.html`

## Requirements

Some scripts rely on the presence of third party tools on the system. In order to be able to build all the contents of this folder, you'll need:

- [PP](http://cdsoft.fr/pp/) (version `>= 2.0`)
- [pandoc](http://pandoc.org) (version `>= 2.0`)
- [Sass](http://sass-lang.com/) (Dart)
- [clean-css-cli](https://www.npmjs.com/package/clean-css-cli) (Node.js)
- [multiwatch](https://www.npmjs.com/package/multiwatch) (Node.js)

## Building The Template

To build the template launch [`TEMPLATE-BUILD.bat`](./TEMPLATE-BUILD.bat). This will:

1. Compile `GitHub.css` from Sass sources.
2. Minify `GitHub.css` to `GitHub.min.css`.
3. Load `GitHub_source.html5` into memory and inject the contents of `GitHub.min.css` over the `{{CSS-INJECT}}` placeholder string.
4. Save the final template with injected CSS to `../GitHub.html5` (parent folder).

You can skip __Step-1__ (compiling CSS from Sass) by passing the "`--no-sass`" option:

```
TEMPLATE-BUILD --no-sass
```

... this is useful if you are not editing the `*.scss` sources, or don't have Sass on your system. (It's also required to prevent a vicious circle in `WATCH-ALL.bat`)

## Building The Template Preview

To build the template preview example launch [`PREVIEW-BUILD.bat`](./PREVIEW-BUILD.bat). This will:

1. Invoke `..\..\..\..\pp\macros\INIT-ENV.bat` to initialize the env vars of the PP Macros library.
2. Invoke PP to preprocess `PREVIEW.md`.
3. Pipe the preprocessed markdown to pandoc for HTML conversion.
4. Save the final HTML document to `../GitHub-Template-Preview.html` (parent folder).

# Editing Instructions

The [`WATCH-ALL.bat`](./WATCH-ALL.bat) script will watch for any changes in source files affecting both the template and its preview example, when file changes are detected it will automatically rebuild the template and/or the template preview.

## Editing The Template

These are the editable source files of the pandoc HTML5 template:

- [`GitHub_source.html5`](./GitHub_source.html5)

And these are the Sass source files of the CSS stylesheet:

- [`GitHub.scss`](./GitHub.scss)
- [`_alerts.scss`](./_alerts.scss)
- [`_github-markdown.scss`](./_github-markdown.scss)
- [`_pandoc.scss`](./_pandoc.scss)

All other template files are autogenerated by scripts.

## Editing The Template Preview

These are the editable source files of the template preview file:

- [`PREVIEW.md`](./PREVIEW.md)

<!-- EOF -->
